---
title: Riding the displacement wave 
date: 2025-09-08
collection: AI & Society
tags: ai, startups
---

# Riding the displacement wave 

There is a lot of talk about displacement in relation to recent AI advances, especially when it comes to certain skill sets and employment opportunities. What seems to be less talked about is how some of the companies that are part of this investment cycle are themselves subject to a possible displacement of the very services they offer. Two interesting case studies of this can be found in my home city of Stockholm with the well-funded start ups Lovable and Talentium. 

The former is one of the market leaders in vibe coding and rapid prototyping, especially beautiful, responsive frontend with some level of backend integration. The latter is active in the talent search business, promising to make recruiting top talent easier by searching the web and leveraging more diverse information channels. 

I think that both of these companies are interesting, because while they are explicitly marketed as AI companies, the very premise of their products are made with reference to a perspective that is decidedly pre-AI. In some ways this makes sense: Disruption supposedly starts in one corner of the economy and then it spreads by ´reimagining´ what traditional processes look like. The speed, ambition and of course execution of this reimagining determines the ideological success of the project. I think that despite some of the hype and futurism that these two companies bring to bear, they are not doing the full remimagining necessary if one buys into some of the projections of what a more mature AI enabled economy will look like. 

What are these projections? First of all, that it will make economic sense to move a large part of the work force from medium level office work into more manual sectors of the economy. This does not necessarily mean that it is going to happen, but it will be the economically sensible thing to do, and it might, for different reasons we will not expound upon here, already be the case that there is an enormous overproduction of office work. At the same time we will see a huge increase in the leverage enjoyed by intellectual work done by a smaller majority of top performers within their respective domains. Together this creates a clear bimodal distribution in leverage and a clustering of workers that would previously have had nominally very similar day to day working lives, seen from a distance. These effects are what we might call the labor displacement theme. 

Secondly, we have the transition from current chatbot apps to full operating systems and user interfaces that natively pipe AI into ´everything´, something that both Satya Nadella and Sam Altman (and I´m sure many others) have discussed at length. Altman even floated the idea that the user interface would be dynamically generated by the user query, personalized and task specifically served in real time. This is an idea that Joel Hellermark at Sana Labs, another Stockholm company, has also floated in the past. We might call this the theme of changing user interfaces. 

I would argue that both companies solve problems for their end users that are transitory if one fully buys into these projections, and that they will therefore need to adapt and ride the wave of displacement, unless they want to find themselves ´behind´ said wave. 

## Talent is actually scarce 

If we start with the Talentium example, the claim would be that many of the qualities that you can evaluate from text data are going to be less important going forward, mainly due to the following factors:

First of all, the increasing ease with which prospective employees can generate traces of text data on their LinkedIn or personal websites that looks very good but carries no substance. I can create a Github or personal website with highly derivative thoughts just by prompting and pasting of great sources to provide a spark, it doesn´t say that much about my ability to adapt and think critically on my own when faced with a novel problem, and it doesn't tell you whether I can bring something from prototype to production, as those two skills are now completely decoupled. This undermines many of the additional data channels that Talentium uses. 

If we also buy into the labor displacement theme, we will either see a movement of workers from fields where text production is the primary delivarable, and if we don't... then well, under the realization of the projection above, that is the scenario where we retain a large swath of the labor population in office roles where they produce little economic value. Depending on how this arrangement works, we might see a decoupling of economic value produced by an employee and the benefit they draw from the system. Big companies become gatekeepers of employment and it doesn't matter much what work one actually produces. Appearance of producitivty and politics take precedence. I have little work experience so I couldn't tell you, but perhaps this is already a description of what modern work is like in many places. 

In such a system, the people you know and personal attributes not directly related to production become more important. Recruitment then is much more likely to happen at a bar or the gym than via some SaaS tabular AI-engine chunking through candidates. For the top candidates, their output and connections are not going to come in the same high volume as for this middle segment, making the need for search more plausible. But I think it is far more likely that many smart and ambitious people will meet at events where interesting ideas that they care about are discussed, either online or offline, so this is probably where talent scouts should focus their attention. Not by monitoring these spaces but by actively engaging with and becoming part of them. Perhaps prospective coworkers are the best recruiters. 

## Vibe coding for the future of interfaces

When we consider Lovable, we have to think a bit harder, since it is after all true that their service can essentially generate the UI for web pages with very little delay. 

On the other hand, people don't want to visit such web pages, don't want to interact with them, but would much rather ask their favorite chatbot and get the raw data piped directly into that kind of AI augmented workspace. The tool makes it extremely easy to get a prototype app up and running, but it is not the kind of app that I would want to use or like to sign up to... I don't want a duolingo clone that works just like duolingo, with a standalone web page or even its own iOS app. 

I am much more interested in buying a subscription to a service, perhaps administered via an MCP server, that plugs directly into my already existing chatbot subscriptions. If I could get a Swiss German trainer with memory and specialized tools and databases on the backend to live inside my ChatGPT, this would be so much more valuable, not least because it could interact with the abilities native to the chatbot as well as any other app (or MCP server) I have connected. 

There is a lot that needs to fall into place in terms of open standards here, but one could see a future where something like ChatGPT is the new app store, and where it is the primary way of interacting with some apps. There could be a special SDK to generate app specific UIs based on user queries. As far as I know, this doesn't exist as of the 8th of September 2025, but it could and probably should exist in the future. Instead of vibe coding the UI of a web page, I would like to be able to tune in words (vibe) what kind of automatically generated UI my ChatGPT bound users will see when they interact with my MCP server, including how much control to give them over the design and granularity of this generation. This is a form of vibe coding, but it is more aligned with where things are going. It will be interesting to see whether current vibe coding incumbents can tackle this new category if it emerges. 
